I am so excited to be here.
This is my fourth year at the POSIT Conference,
and I've been looking forward to this event for months.
For me, one of the most magical places on earth
is POSIT Conf.
Just like at Disney World,
I get to meet my favorite celebrities,
take home awesome souvenirs,
and take photos in front of iconic landmarks.
And even though we can't be
in this magical place every day,
what we can do is create a community back at home
that feels just as magical.
My name is Melissa Van Bussel.
I'm a senior analyst at Statistics Canada,
and I help run a large polyglot data science community
at my workplace called the R and Python User Group.
Our group is pretty magical,
and today I want to share with you
some of the things that make it so magical,
and I also want to share how you can create
your own magical polyglot community.
The R and Python User Group at Statistics Canada
has over 1,000 members,
all of whom have different levels of experience
with programming,
and who all use different programming languages.
In our group, we really hold the philosophy
that the community aspect is far more important
than the programming language that someone uses.
In the same way that Disney World isn't about Mickey Mouse,
your data science community doesn't have to be
about one specific language.
And in fact, part of what makes going to Disney World
so magical is the fact that you can see
all of your favorite characters all in one place.
That's why the name of our group
has both R and Python in it,
so that our members don't feel like they have to choose
between one or the other.
Don't be too misled by this name, though,
because even though it's only got two languages
in the title, we do tend to be the go-to
for all things technical at our workplace.
It's just that the acronym RPUG is a lot nicer to say
than whatever this one would be.
By creating a group that embraces
multiple programming languages,
you're ensuring that your group is going to stay relevant,
regardless of which language or tool
ends up becoming the most popular over time.
And if you want to create your own Polyglot community,
it turns out that you don't need a magic wand to do it.
I'm going to share a few of the strategies
that have been working well for us at Statistics Canada,
and hopefully that'll help spark some ideas
for your own group as well.
If you ask somebody to introduce themselves,
especially at this conference,
you'll notice that people's introductions
usually include the programming language that they use.
Someone might describe themselves as an R person
or as a Python person in the same sentence
where they tell you what their name is and where they work.
For a lot of us, the programming language that we use
can feel very core to our identity.
And so if you want to create a successful Polyglot group,
then my recommendation to you
is to create branding for your group
that people can identify with
and can associate with your group.
But more specifically, you want to make sure
that that branding isn't overly specific to one language.
For the R and Python user group,
our branding is centered around our group's acronym,
which is RPUG.
And in 2021, one of our members, Thomas Wood,
created a logo for the group, which is a pirate pug.
This logo was created entirely using code,
which means it's completely reproducible
and also pretty easy to modify,
which means that it wasn't long
before other members of the group,
other members of the group started creating spin-offs
of the original logo.
As of today, we've got over 30 different versions
of this logo, the stickers of which you can find
all over the place at the StatCan office in Ottawa.
One of our other members, Alex McSween,
who's actually here at Conf,
created a 2025 RPUG calendar
where each month of the year features a different pug
based on that month's theme.
Over the last year, we've also hosted
a couple of merch orders that have been centered
around these logos.
A brand isn't just a brand, and a logo isn't just a logo.
It's something that helps your members feel more connected
to something bigger than just the language that they use,
but more importantly, it also helps them feel connected
to your group.
Once your group has its own identity,
the next step is to make sure
that there's something for everyone.
Because a polyglot group is going to have
a wide variety of people, sort of by definition,
you wanna create a multi-park experience
where every person in the group
feels like there's something that's for them.
At Disney, we've also created a multi-park experience
at Disney World.
Epcot is the theme park that's the most focused
on learning and exploration.
And in RPUG, we've got our own little version of Epcot
that provides our members with a number of ways
that they can learn new skills related to open source.
For example, we have a monthly meeting
where we share updates about what's new
in the world of open source and at Statistics Canada,
followed by a presentation or a workshop
from a guest speaker.
We try to make sure that these presentations
aren't super specific to one language
by choosing topics that are broadly applicable
to anybody who works with data.
Over the last year, some of the topics that we've had
have included a showcase of internally developed
R and Python packages, a roundup of success stories
when working with the parquet file format,
and a presentation from the Statistics Canada library
showing our members how they can access library resources
to learn about open source topics.
We've also got an internal website that has guides
and tutorials for working with R and Python
in a way that's specific to our workplace's
technical infrastructure.
And we've got a webpage that outlines project templates
and packages that have been developed
by the members of our community.
Hollywood Studios is the theme park
that's all about going behind the scenes
and seeing the hidden work that goes into making
the published product before it ever ends up
on the big screen.
For us, that means giving people a safe space
to try things out, to make mistakes,
to learn, and to ask questions.
We host low-stakes code challenges
where the prompt can either be solved
in just a couple of lines of code or in a lot more,
depending on how creative the person wants to be
with their solution.
And participants are encouraged to have fun
and be silly with it so that it doesn't feel like work.
You can use any language that you want for these challenges
and this tends to be a space where people will
often use a language that they're less comfortable in.
We've also got a number of different ways
that our members can ask for help with programming
or other technical questions.
We've got a very large chat on Microsoft Teams
where people ask questions casually throughout the day,
but we also have nine volunteers that offer
drop-in office hours on a regular basis.
Because the group is polyglot,
each office hour clearly outlines
which topics the current volunteer
can answer questions about.
And it also points users to the full list of office hours
if they need help figuring out who the right person is
that they should reach out to for a specific topic.
If you've ever been to Disney World,
then your favorite theme park is probably Magic Kingdom,
which is a place all about having fun just for fun's sake.
Over the last year, RPUG has had quite a few events
that have had absolutely nothing to do with programming
and have really just been an opportunity
for like-minded people to hang out together
and do something fun outside of work hours.
We've had a couple of trivia nights
and recently we had an event called Beads and Brews
where we got together for dinner after work
and then people could make friendship bracelets
or key chains or whatever else they wanted to make.
This year, we're also launching an RPUG yearbook
just for fun where we can put all of the pictures
from this year's events.
And we'll also have a section for RPUG awards
so that we can recognize the contributions of our members.
Now a lot of the stuff that I've just talked about
might seem kind of silly,
especially in the context of a group that in theory
is supposed to be focused on data science,
but having these fun activities is actually really important
for keeping members engaged with your group.
And if your group is polyglot,
then I'd argue that this kind of thing
is even more important
because it's these types of events and activities
that are going to give your members a chance to connect
and figure out what stuff they do have in common.
It's a lot harder for somebody to make a new friend
during a programming workshop
than it is for them to make a new friend
while they're doing something fun and casual.
And the more that the members of your group
are friends with each other,
the more they're going to want to participate
in your group's activities as a result.
Another way that you can increase participation
in your group is by taking a page
out of Disney World's book.
When you go to Disney World,
you don't just feel like you're watching a bunch of actors.
You feel like you're a character
that actually belongs in the story.
And you want to create this same kind of feeling
within your group.
One of the easiest ways that you can do this
is by letting every member of the group
be as involved as they want to be
with the organization and the planning of the group.
And if your group is polyglot,
again, this is going to be even more important
because nobody is an expert at everything.
So you want to make sure you've got a wide range of voices
so that each member of the group feels represented
and welcome, regardless of which languages
or tools they use.
In RPUG, we have the philosophy
that anybody who wants to contribute can.
There's a few different ways that we do this,
and one of them is the RPUG Weekly Newsletter.
And anybody at Statistics Canada
can publish something in this newsletter.
You actually don't even have to be a part of the group
to submit an article to it.
What we get as a result is a weekly,
community-curated collection of upcoming events,
programming tips, and so on.
We also have an internal RPUG website,
which anyone can contribute to,
can contribute to, by submitting a merge request on GitLab.
And I took these numbers directly from the repository,
and we can see that in the last four months alone,
we've had 33 contributors across almost 2,000 commits.
This group is graphically,
this group is grassroots,
it's really by users and for users,
which means that the people who are organizing the group
are also the same people who actually use the tools
on a regular basis,
rather than people from senior management, for example.
We try really hard to keep things casual.
We try to avoid getting too bogged down with bureaucracy.
But with that being said,
of course, there is still a lot of work to be done.
So, what is RPUG?
RPUG is a community-based RPUG project
that provides some structure to the group.
To be honest, it would be basically impossible
to have a group of 1,000 people
and not have some type of structure.
It definitely takes a village
to have a group this large run smoothly.
We have around 1,300 members in total,
we call the RPUG committee.
The committee is open to anyone,
and it's as simple as just asking
to be a part of the committee,
but it does tend to be the more advanced programmers
who join this subset.
Personally, I really love being part of this committee.
We meet every two weeks,
and in addition to planning some of the fun stuff
that I've talked about earlier today,
this is also the group that discusses
the more technical topics.
In particular, we talk a lot about
how open-source tools are being used
and supported in our workplace.
We've found that this model where anybody can join
and everyone can be as involved as they want to be
has worked pretty well for us.
If you're in this room right now,
it's probably because you're somebody who cares deeply
about building and sustaining data communities.
And if that's you, then there's probably a good chance
that one of the following scenarios applies to you.
Maybe you're already part of an amazing group
that's thriving.
Maybe you're just starting out,
and you're wondering how to get
your new group off the ground.
Or maybe you're in the third camp,
and you're part of a group that might be
struggling a bit to stay afloat.
Maybe you're in a smaller city or a smaller workplace,
and so the pool of potential people
that could possibly participate in your group
is just a little bit smaller.
If the second or third one applies to you,
then I would really encourage you
to give the polyglot approach a chance.
By doing so, you're multiplying your potential members,
you're multiplying your potential impact,
and you might also learn a new programming language
along the way.
At the end of the day, it shouldn't be about R versus Python.
It should be about creating a space
where everybody feels welcome
and is excited to learn from each other.
So regardless of which of these scenarios applies to you,
I hope that my talk gave you some ideas
about how you can create a community
that feels like a Disney world of data science.
If you're interested in creating
your own polyglot community
and you wanna connect to chat about it,
I'm happy to take questions in just a second,
or you can find my information up there
and we can chat later.
And if you're somebody who likes to collect
hex stickers at conf,
and you want your very own RPUG sticker,
come say hi afterwards and I can give you one.
Thanks.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
We have lots of questions here.
Several of them are interested in
how you got started with the RPUG group
and the trajectory of asking people to join
and how you gathered the first group of people
in order to start the group.
Yeah, great question.
I'm probably not the best person to ask about that
because the group started in 2017
when I, like I didn't work at Statistics Canada back then.
So I wasn't there for the early days of the group.
I joined StatCan in 2021.
So by that point, there were already a few hundred people
in the group, so yeah.
Okay, but if you were to generalize that
and give some advice about someone starting a group
from scratch, would you be able to offer
any things you've learned so far about polyglot groups
to help someone get one off the ground?
Yeah, good question.
Yeah, so I think the biggest tip that I would have
is kind of like the section of my talk
where I was talking about doing things that are fun.
I think the mistake that a lot of groups make
is they only focus on the technical side of things.
So it kind of feels like this is just a thing
that somebody is doing because their career
is related to data.
But if you want people to feel truly connected,
then having the fun stuff as well,
I think is really important.
And also just recognizing that not every person
is gonna want to participate in everything.
So there's gonna be some people
who they're only gonna want to do the stuff
that is productive in the traditional sense,
like workshops or whatever else.
And then there's gonna be other people
who only want to do the fun stuff, so.
Really good advice, thank you.
Very important question,
which is your favorite RPUG variant sticker?
Ah, okay, that's a great question,
and I have to be careful about my answer
because Alex has made a lot of them
and she's sitting in the third row here.
But, okay, I'll try to go back to them.
No, that's probably way too impossible.
No, it's just not gonna load at all now.
So my favorite one is probably like the reindeer,
like Rudolph, it's called Rudolph the Red-Nosed Pug.
And I think that might have been,
was that the one that won,
there was like a competition this year
where people voted for their favorite ones
and I think that one, was that the winner?
Yeah.
Perfect.
Do you have trouble sharing demos between teammates
for those teams with sensitive data
that can't be shared with other teams?
Sorry, can you repeat the first part?
Yeah, do you have trouble sharing demos
or workflows with teammates that have sensitive data
that can't be shared with other teams
or is that not really an issue for our pug group?
Yeah, good question.
So almost all of our meetings are internal people only.
So even if we can't share like the specific data
that somebody's working on,
they can probably share the code that's on GitLab.
We can't put any data on there anyways,
so everything that's on GitLab
is already abstracted away from the code.
So I wouldn't say we have too much trouble with that.
Great.
Is the group all in Ottawa or are some remote?
And if the latter, how do you keep the remote people engaged
particularly with fun events?
Yeah, that's a great question.
No, not everybody is in Ottawa.
We have like offices in a bunch of major cities
across Canada.
So we have some events that are in-person only
like the trivia nights or the beads and brews,
but then we have our monthly meetings as hybrid,
but we also have some events that are virtual only.
So we have like our pug virtual coffee hour
that's entirely online.
But I would say like that's probably an area
where we need to kind of like work on things a bit more.
I think it is like the Ottawa people
who are most excited about the group.
But the other thing that we do as well
is like there's been a few times
where we've sent like stickers or other merch
to offices outside of Ottawa, so.
Cool, thank you so much.
Thank you.